---
title: 'Zigzags'
date: 2026-02-27
permalink: /posts/2026/02/zigzags/
tags:
  - essays
---

This is a curated list of some mathematicians' media where they talked about their early life and/or some anecdotes that make them a bit more human. We have this idea that can be sometimes very damaging, that the great contributors to this world, the Fields medalists and such, were infallible. That they were extraordinary beings that never struggled in their path to mastering their craft. I've always thought that such an idea came from incompetence, and it never occurred to me that those great men and women might have experienced it as well in their own right. That is, until I read Simone Weil's *Attente de Dieu*:

>At fourteen I fell into one of those fits of bottomless despair that come with adolescence, and I seriously thought of dying because of the mediocrity of my natural faculties. The exceptional gifts of my brother, who had a childhood and youth comparable to those of Pascal, brought my own inferiority home to me. I did not mind having no visible successes, but what did grieve me was the idea of being excluded from that transcendent kingdom to which only the truly great have access and wherein truth abides. I preferred to die rather than live without that truth.

A feeling that she eventually surpassed:

>After months of inward darkness, I suddenly had the everlasting conviction that any human being, even though practically devoid of natural faculties, can penetrate to the kingdom of truth reserved for genius, if only he longs for truth and perpetually concentrates all his attention upon its attainment. He thus becomes a genius too, even though for lack of talent his genius cannot be visible from outside…
>Under the name of truth I also included beauty, virtue, and every kind of goodness, so that for me it was a question of a conception of the relationship between grace and desire. The conviction that had come to me was that when one hungers for bread one does not receive stones.

We consider life to be some sort of round-by-round elimination tournament where you have to get to the right institutions at the right age (i.e. minimal age possible), when in reality it's not really the case. This is not to say that an efficient path wouldn't be the best one to maximize your expected outcome; as Ed Witten puts it :

> I don't recommend this trajectory for other people. I would recommend to other people to have fewer zigzags in their life than I did. Many people write to me and want me to tell them, that I think it was great to have all these zigzags, but I can't honestly say that. So I never do.

But it helps to know, in those nights where you feel lost and purposeless, that you're not alone, and that greater men and women have been at similar crossroads...
This is not to say that anyone can achieve such milestones as theirs, but I firmly believe that having that assumption would lead one to achieve much more than what he would've otherwise.

Enough talking here's the list, I hope you find in them comfort and motivation to continue exploring what you find fun. The one common factor I truly found between all of the biographies I've read is the work one puts into oneself.

- [Terence Tao's Princeton generals](https://web.math.princeton.edu/generals/students/tao_terence) (PhD interview), and how he's human after all (only when he lacks preparation though).
- Ed Witten's interviews such as [this one](https://www.joachim-herz-stiftung.de/en/about-us/prices/hamburg-prize-for-theoretical-physics/edward-witten) and how he started his path by majoring in history, experimenting with politics, before going back to physics (and why/how he picked it instead of maths).
- [Hugo Duminil-Copin's interview here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N_3FMrUUS6A) (with a very nice introduction to his work at the end of it) he goes through his early days at Louis le Grand and ENS, feeling imposter syndrome, and how pushing through and deeply digging concepts eventually pays off.
- [Maxime Kontsevitch's childhood](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1CXvSRQVoZY), getting contaminated with the love of mathematics from his brother, needing time to find the answer to a simple question (so no Gauss early genius or anything). And how his creative output has been through ups and downs.

Work on things you enjoy, maximize for fun and be [excitingly ambitious](https://paulgraham.com/greatwork.html).